Aren’t we all glad that we are healthy enough
to be able to listen
to the annual meeting program?
Yes, we don’t want to take it for granted.
Worldwide, some 20,000
of our brothers and sisters
have died so far from the effects
of the COVID-19 pandemic.
But tens of thousands
of our brothers and sisters,
including many relatives,
have been and are now
affected emotionally by this fact.
Death tolls affect friends and family,
and the feeling of loss is deep.
Secular sources say that the overall
death rate in the United States
is about 1 percent
of the population each year.
Every year around the world,
an average of over 60 million people die.
The daily average is about 164,000.
How sad!
With the COVID-19 plague,
the number of total deaths
worldwide is, of course, higher.
In the United States, over 600,000 citizens
have died from COVID-19 alone.
Even when tempered
by the hope of the resurrection,
the death of a loved one
is still a traumatic loss
which is deeply felt.
Years, perhaps decades,
of close companionship and sharing
are suddenly and tragically ended.
Of course, if those that died
were part of our family,
it affects us much more emotionally.
We are also affected
because we did not expect them to die,
except perhaps if some
were in their 80’s or 90’s.
Even though we know that they will come back,
we still feel hurt and are very sorry
to have temporarily lost them.
It is very sad to lose somebody in death,
even temporarily, isn’t it?
In the case of Lazarus,
the Bible shows that even Jesus shed tears
when he saw the emotional pain
experienced by Lazarus’ sisters.
To be sad and to cry
in the case of somebody’s death
is not an indication
of somebody’s lack of faith
or an emotional imbalance.
Never feel ashamed in such a case.
Feel free to “[give] way to tears.”
At John 5:28, 29,
Jesus’ promise is comforting.
He said:
“Do not be amazed at this,
“[because] the hour is coming
“in which all those in the memorial tombs
“will hear [the Son of God’s] voice
“and come out, those who did good things
“to a resurrection of life,
“and those who practiced vile things
to a resurrection of judgment.”
However, Jehovah foretold
that sickness and death
will not continue forever
but are temporary now
and will soon end as the new world arrives.
Even in the past, Jehovah miraculously proved
that he’s able to prevent sickness
and subsequent death.
And he proved that he has the power
to bring back humans to life.
As much as we are sorry
to have lost relatives
or friends in death
because of COVID-19 or any other reason,
we can rejoice that Jehovah
will bring them back in the resurrection.
Jehovah brought back some of his servants
in the resurrection in the past.
The Bible speaks of nine
specific resurrections of individuals.
Instead of reading a list with their names,
you can try to recall who these persons were.
If you don’t come up with nine persons,
why not make it a part of a conversation
with friends to complete the list?
It refers to Jesus and eight additional ones.
It is so encouraging and comforting
to talk about it.
Hebrews 11:35
speaks of a better resurrection,
better than the resurrection
of the eight persons mentioned in the Bible
who had to die again at a later date.
The future resurrection is better
because it contains the possibility
to never die again in all eternity.
Imagine living not only for a thousand years
but for a million years,
for ten million years,
for a hundred million years,
for a hundred billion years, and so on.
As for those being
brought back in the resurrection,
the resurrection will be
perceived like having happened
in the blink of an eye after their death,
although they may have been
dead for quite some time.
For instance,
when Lazarus was resurrected,
he did not recall
that he was laying in the tomb.
When he was resurrected,
to him it was like the next moment
after he lost consciousness from dying.
When he came to,
he had no perception that he was in the tomb.
Jehovah created man originally.
He can also re-create a human.
Psalm 104:29, 30 says:
“When you hide your face,
“they are disturbed.
“If you take away their spirit,
“they die and return to the dust.
“If you send out the spirit,
they are created.”
Jehovah will give the resurrected ones a body
just as it pleases him.
Their bodies will be physically sound
and obviously look similar
to the original body
so that they will be recognized
by their loved ones.
Faithful Christians who die late
during the time of the end
will likely be among
the first ones to be raised again.
We can also expect an early resurrection
for some of the faithful men of old
who will join others
as “princes” in the new world.
Nevertheless, we should not be
dogmatic on such matters.
On many issues related to the resurrection,
the Bible is silent.
It does not spell out details of how,
when, or at what locations
the resurrection of individuals will occur.
It does not tell us how those returning
will be housed, fed, and clothed.
It would be unwise to spend a lot of time
trying to find answers
that are at present unanswerable.
It is best to just focus
on the fact of the resurrection to come.
First Corinthians 15:52
also speaks of the resurrection
—not of an earthly resurrection,
but a heavenly, spiritual one.
This text refers to anointed ones
who would die and be raised
“in the blink of an eye.”
This resurrection began during our time,
the time of the end.
When they die,
they go to heaven in an instant
—like during “the blink of an eye.”
But those who have the earthly hope
to live forever on earth in Paradise
also will have the same perception later
when they will be
resurrected in the Paradise.
The time from their death
to the moment of their resurrection
will not be consciously experienced by them.
It will be for them
like the ‘blinking of an eye.’
Those resurrected to heaven
will obtain immortality.
Those resurrected on earth
will not be immortal
but have the chance to live
forever as long as they remain faithful.
In connection with the ancient Israelites,
Jehovah also proved that he’s able to protect
his people from sicknesses.
And he did it
when the Israelites remained faithful.
Deuteronomy 7:15 foretold
in connection with those
who escaped from Egypt:
“Jehovah will take away
from you all sickness,
“and he will not bring upon you
any of the terrible diseases
that you have known in Egypt.”
We can trust that Jehovah
fulfilled his promise.
He did so when the Israelites were faithful.
He blessed the Israelites
with good health and long life.
This shows his past love
for the people of Israel.
It also indicates his power
and that if he wishes to repeat this miracle,
he can do it, of course.
He will do so after Armageddon,
during the Millennium,
or Thousand Year Reign of Christ.
Revelation 22:2 foretells
“the healing of the nations.”
This includes physical and emotional
healing in the new world.
Death is really an enemy,
but Jehovah will do away with it.
At Isaiah 33:24, it says
that in the new world
“no resident will say: ‘I am sick.’”
There will be no hospitals.
There will be no drugstores.
There will be no physicians.
There will be no professional nurses.
At Revelation 21:4,
it foretells that in the new world
there will be ‘neither mourning
nor outcry nor pain anymore.’
We are very sad
about what happened around the world
with so many of our brothers and sisters
falling asleep from COVID-19 recently,
but we know they will come back.
They will come back healthy.
They will not come back
looking like old people,
even if they died at 80 years.
They might look like they are
in their 30’s when resurrected.
As stated earlier,
they will look reasonably similar
to their original body
so that they will be recognized
by their loved ones.
How it fills our hearts with love for Jehovah
that he will bring back
in the resurrection our loved ones!
The apostle Paul had a firm hope.
He explained at 2 Corinthians 1:7:
“Our hope for you is unwavering,
“knowing as we do that,
“just as you are sharers of the sufferings,
in the same way
you will also share the comfort.”
At the conclusion of his letter, Paul urged:
“Continue . . . to be comforted, . . .
and the God of love and of peace
will be with you.”
What an important lesson
we can learn from this!
All members of the Christian congregation
need to share the comfort
that God provides through his Word,
his holy spirit,
and his earthly organization.
The principal source of comfort is,
of course, Jehovah himself.
There’s no real lasting comfort
that does not originate with God.
Appropriately, then, Paul wrote:
“[Blessed] be the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ,
“the Father of tender mercies
“and the God of all comfort,
who comforts us in all our [tribulation].”
What inspiring words!
The Greek word here rendered “comfort”
is linked to “a calling to one side.”
Therefore, it is the standing
beside a person to encourage him
when he’s undergoing severe testing.
One Biblical scholar wrote:
“The word . . . always means
“far more than soothing sympathy. . . .
“Christian comfort
is the comfort which brings courage,
“the comfort which enables a man to cope
with all that life can do to him.”
It also includes comforting words
that are based on a solid promise and hope
—that of the resurrection of the dead.
So, what can we do
to enhance the comfort for others?
Listen.
One of the most helpful things you can do
is to share
the bereaved one’s pain by listening.
You may ask,
“Would you care to talk about it?”
One Christian recalls when his father died,
“It really helped me
when others asked what happened
and then really listened.”
Listen patiently and sympathetically.
“Weep with [people] who weep”
recommends the Bible at Romans 12:15.
Be available.
Make yourself available
not just for the first few days
when many friends and relatives are present,
but for months later, if necessary,
when others have returned
to their normal routine.
Our Christian interest and sympathy
can mean so much
in any time of need.
The Bible says that “there exists a friend
sticking closer than a brother.”
Talk about the good qualities
of the deceased person.
This is another great help.
Share positive anecdotes
that you recall about the individual,
and do not be afraid
to use the person’s name.
Write a letter or send a comforting card.
Often overlooked
is the value of a condolence letter
or a beautiful sympathy card.
Its advantage?
It can be read over and over again.
Such a letter need not be long,
but it should show your compassion.
Pray with them.
Do not underestimate
the value of your prayers
with and for bereaved fellow Christians.
The Bible says at James 5:16:
“A righteous man’s supplication . . .
has much force.”
Encourage sufferers to meditate on Jehovah.
He’s the God of all comfort.
He said in Isaiah:
“I [I] myself am the One
that is comforting you [people].”
He also said:
“Like a man whom
his own mother keeps comforting,
so I myself shall
keep comforting you people.”
Find with me Psalm 119.
Let’s first read verses 50, 52:
“This is my comfort in my affliction,
for your saying has preserved me alive.”
Verse 52:
“I remember your judgments from of old,
O Jehovah, and I find comfort in them.”
And now even verse 76:
“May your loyal love please comfort me,
“according to the promise
you made to your servant.”
Note that the word “comfort”
is used repeatedly in those passages.
Yes, we can find true comfort
for ourselves and for others
by turning to Jehovah’s Word
in our time of affliction.
This combined
with the love and compassion of the brothers
can help us to live
through our loss and fill our lives again
with joyful activity
in the Christian ministry.
What a privilege to worship the Almighty,
our loving God, Jehovah,
who will bring back
our loved ones in the resurrection!
There will never again be a pandemic
to claim the life of faithful servants.
Because at that time
“no resident will say: ‘I am sick.’”